We've had dates in our data for a while.
But, how do we use date information in a model?
You can imagine trying to directly feed
the raw data into the model and not getting anything useful out of it.
Well, we can apply our domain knowledge to engineer useful date features.
To motivate the idea of using date information.
Let's talk about two anomalies well-studied by academics.
The first is called a window dressing;
this is a term that refers to actions that some firms may take to make
their firms look better when they report
their holdings to investors at the end of each quarter.
Near the end of each quarter,
some firms may sell low performing stocks and buy high performing stocks,
so that when they report their stock holdings to investors,
the constituents look better compared to what was actually held during the quarter.
At the end of the quarter,
this behavior may impact low performing stocks by pushing their returns even
lower and may impact high performing stocks by increasing their short-term returns.
The second effect is called the January effect;
investors often sell poorly performing stocks near
the end of the year and then buy them back at the beginning of the year.
They may do this in order to realize losses,
to help offset other capital gains.
As such, you can imagine that knowing a stocks recent trading patterns and
knowing we are about to cross into January could be informative for a trading signal.
Also, we may see different trading activity
at the end of each month or on different days of the week.
For instance, short-term traders may prefer to
close out some of their positions before the weekend.
So, there may be different trading activity at the beginning and end of the week.
Because of all these kinds of seasonal and calendar effects,
it could be beneficial for a machine-learning model to use
features that indicate whether a date is at the end of the year,
end of the quarter,
end of the month, or end of the week.
Similarly, we can create features that indicate the start of the year,
quarter, month, or week.
Note that unlike when we created potential alpha factors,
we don't have to specify which direction we expect the stock returns to go,
as features can be
purely conditional factors that interacts with other features and factors.
So even if the price movements don't follow the January effect for a particular year,
a feature indicating the end of the year may still become useful
in capturing other trading activity that occurs around the end of the year.